GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
And welcome back.
GWEN IFILL: Happy to be back.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Ahead
of Tuesday's
primaries, Hillary Clinton is on
the verge
of becoming the Democrats'
presumptive nominee,
Bernie Sanders vows to contest
the convention,
and Donald Trump stirs up a new
hornets nest
within his party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Monday, we
remember boxing champion
Muhammad Ali. His
life in and out of the ring
inspired generations.
GWEN IFILL: And how a
revitalized Route 66
is renewing once abandoned towns
from East
to West.
JON FEY, Berwyn Preservation
Committee: It's
not going to be 1926 again. But
if there's
enough gems that we can
recognize and preserve,
I think we will have a real
valuable commodity
for the community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The end of the
Democratic presidential
primaries is almost at hand, and
Hillary Clinton
is just 23 delegates away from
the number
she needs to secure her party's
nomination.
She kept campaigning today in
California,
hoping for a big finish, as
Republican Donald
Trump faced down critics in his
own ranks.
We will have a full report after
the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: An early-season
tropical storm, Colin, raised
the alarm on
Florida's Panhandle coast.
Governor Rick Scott
declared emergencies in 34
counties as the
storm brought winds of 50 miles
an hour and
several inches of rain. Colin is
expected
to cross to the Atlantic, then
move along
the South Carolina coastline.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S.-backed
fighters in Syria
closed in today on the Islamic
State's last
stronghold along the Turkish
border. Kurdish
fighters advanced on Manbij,
which sits on
a major supply route to Raqqa,
the militants'
de facto capital.
Meanwhile, aid groups said ISIS
forces in
Iraq are shooting civilians
trying to flee
Fallujah by boat and other
means. A government
offensive there has stalled.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. Navy has
banned alcohol
for American sailors in Japan
over a string
of incidents. The latest was
Sunday's arrest
of a sailor who drove the wrong
way and hit
two other vehicles on Okinawa.
In Washington today, the
Pentagon's Peter
Cook said banning drinking and
confining sailors
to base are essential steps.
PETER COOK, Pentagon Press
Secretary: These
restrictions will help prevent
future incidents
by ensuring that each service
member understands
how their actions affect the
U.S.-Japan alliance,
which is essential to the
security and stability
in the region. The department
remains committed
to working with the government
of Japan and
the people of Japan to prevent
such incidents
in the future.
GWEN IFILL: All this comes amid
a renewed
effort on Okinawa to remove U.S.
bases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There will be no
criminal charges
filed against the family of a
3-year-old boy
who fell into a gorilla's
enclosure at the
Cincinnati Zoo. The zoo staffers
shot and
killed the animal after it
grabbed the boy.
A prosecutor said today that the
mother was
watching other children, and the
boy -- quote
-- "just scampered off."
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street moved
higher this
Monday, as Federal Reserve Chair
Janet Yellen
said it's not clear when the
next interest
rate hike will come. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 113 points to
close at 17920.
The Nasdaq rose 26 points, and
the S&P 500
added 10.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the holy
month of Ramadan
began today in much of the
Muslim world. Millions
will take part in prayers and
dawn-to-dusk
fasting.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile,
renovations began at
the site of Jesus' tomb in
Jerusalem for the
first time in more than 200
years. The work
is under way at the chamber
housing the tomb
in the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
it's Politics Monday, a look at
the week ahead
on the campaign trail, including
what's at
stake in California; a sit-down
with the Libertarian
Party's candidate for president,
Gary Johnson,
and much more.
And now to politics.
As we heard earlier, we have
just one day
until the last big primary day
of the 2016
election cycle. Hillary Clinton
won weekend
primaries in the Virgin Islands
and Puerto
Rico, pushing her closer to the
Democratic
Party nomination.
But she and rival Bernie Sanders
are all in
in California, the biggest
delegate prize
on the line.
Our John Yang is in the Golden
State and he
brings us this report.
JOHN YANG: One final day, one
final chance
to make the sale in California.
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders fanned out
across the state
today. Clinton's just a handful
of delegates
shy of clinching the Democratic
nomination,
counting both pledged and
superdelegates.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Tomorrow is a really big day,
everybody.
Yes, well, let's hope it is.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I would
be deeply
honored and humbled for it to be
Hillary day.
JOHN YANG: She will likely claim
the delegates
she needs before polls close on
the West Coast,
but she's working to avoid
losing a potentially
embarrassing loss in the biggest
state of
all.
Hillary Clinton has had a
laser-like focus
on California, cutting short a
campaign trip
to New Jersey to add events
here. And it's
been a family affair. Her
husband, the former
president, has a number of
events here in
the Bay Area today, while she's
focusing on
Southern California.
Her statewide, full-court press
aims to solidify
her support among voters like
these in Oakland.
KATHERINE HAYNES SANSTAD,
Clinton Supporter:
What's needed is a pragmatic
approach to working
with others who can make things
happen. And
I think that Hillary does. Do I
love her?
Eh. Do I think she can get the
job done? Absolutely.
EZRA BRODER, Clinton Supporter:
I have a child
that's due next month, and I
think it'd be
great for the first two
presidents in my child's
life to be an African-American
man and a female.
JOHN YANG: At a news conference
today, Sanders
said that the nomination contest
isn't over
yet.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
We have 475 pledged delegates
coming up. And
my job in the next 24 hours is
to do everything
that I can to win those
delegates.
JOHN YANG: The delegate math may
be against
him, but the Vermont senator
still has plenty
of supporters who say they feel
the Bern.
WOMAN: He seems like a genuine
guy. And, you
know, I'm in all my student loan
debt. So
that is one of the main reasons,
is the student
loan thing.
CESAR CASTILLO, Sanders
Supporter: I think
his domestic policy of wealth
redistribution,
focus on education, health care
and making
those things a priority are the
best option
that we have right now.
JOHN YANG: While the two
Democrats mount one
last battle, Republican
nominee-to-be Donald
Trump was off the campaign trail
today. But
he still defended his latest
attack on a Latino
judge presiding over one of the
Trump University
lawsuits.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Let me just tell you. It's very
simple. I
have had horrible rulings. I
have been treated
very unfairly by this judge.
Now, this judge
is of Mexican heritage. I'm
building a wall.
JOHN YANG: That's drawing fire
from top Republicans.
CHUCK TODD, Moderator, "Meet The
Press": Is
it a racist statement?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
I couldn't disagree more with
what he had
to say.
CHUCK TODD: Do you think it's a
racist statement
to say?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: I don't
agree with what
he had to say. This is a man who
was born
in Indiana. All of us came here
from somewhere
else.
JOHN YANG: Trump told FOX News:
"All I want
to do is figure out why I'm
being treated
unfairly by a judge."
Criticism aside, Trump doesn't
have to worry
about the results in California
tomorrow.
All the focus will be on the
contest between
Clinton and Sanders.
Here in the shadow of the
fog-enshrouded Golden
Gate Bridge -- trust me, it
really is there
-- they're preparing for
Sanders' final pre-primary
event. It's going to be as much
a concert
as it is a rally. His opening
acts include
Dave Matthews, the band
Fishbone, Danny Glover
and the scholar Cornel West --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, John.
So, but tell us, how has Bernie
Sanders been
able to keep it so close? We
know it wasn't
always like this.
JOHN YANG: That's right. They
really decided
that they were going to focus on
California.
They felt they could do well
here if they
spent a lot of time here.
And he has spent a majority of
his time here
since the end of May. And it
appears to be
paying off. He's showing in the
pre-primary
polls for the first time this
season that
he's making inroads among
minority voters,
who have tended to support
Clinton in the
past. The polls show him
splitting Latinos
with Hillary Clinton, and
actually beating
her among Asian-Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John, we also
know that tomorrow
night other states are voting.
Hillary Clinton
could go over the top when these
other state'
results come in, in places like
New Jersey.
How will California even matter
for Bernie
Sanders if that happens?
JOHN YANG: Well, according to
the Sanders
camp, California being so big,
so diverse,
they think that, if she loses
here, if they
were to beat her here, they
could make the
argument to superdelegates that
he's more
electable.
But their big fear is that,
indeed, Hillary
Clinton goes over the top while
voters are
still going to polls here in
California, and
that the Sanders supporters who
haven't gone
to the polls yet get discouraged
and don't
go to the polls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are some of
the Sanders
supporters saying about what
they'd do if
he doesn't win the nomination?
JOHN YANG: A couple of them said
that they
could not vote for Hillary
Clinton under any
circumstances, that they were
going to vote
for the Green Party. But they
are also savvy
enough to know that, here in
California, very
unlikely that it would go
Republican under
any circumstances, so that they
would be able
to make a statement by not
voting for Hillary
Clinton, while they were
confident or felt
assured that they weren't going
to help Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Yang
reporting for us
from California, thank you,
John.
Thanks, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: And that brings us
to Politics
Monday with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Stuart Rothenberg of
The Rothenberg
& Gonzales Political Report, and
now columnist
for The Washington Post's Power
Post.
Welcome to you both.
So, Stu, we seem to be going
through a series
of turning points. WE just --
let's talk about
the Democratic turning points
first. Hillary
Clinton could be making history
tomorrow night.
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The
Rothenberg & Gonzales Political
Report: Right.
Well, she -- I'm quite
confident, Gwen, that
she's going to get at least 23
more delegates.
Probably New Jersey will put her
over the
top. That will be a historic
event, remarkable.
She will continue to build up
delegates throughout
the rest of the evening.
She is going to be the de facto
nominee. The
only question is when Bernie
Sanders and his
supporters accept that, and then
how she pivots
to the general election. She's
actually already
started to pivot.
GWEN IFILL: Amy, do you begin to
see Bernie
Sanders pivoting in any way? We
heard today
that he took a phone call
yesterday on the
side of the road from the
president of these
United States. Who knows what
they talked
about, but we can guess.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes,
we can.
And I think we also saw today
that the president
is eager to get involved into
this campaign,
reports today in The New York
Times saying
that he may be making an
endorsement by the
end of the week.
But it's been very clear for
some time that
Bernie Sanders' decisions are
going to be
important in this race, but the
next most
important person is President
Obama, when
he decides to come out and
basically hug Hillary
Clinton and say, this is the
nominee, everybody
needs to move on.
I'm also going to be watching
very closely
for what other progressive
leaders in the
party, like Elizabeth Warren, do
after Tuesday.
Maybe they give Bernie Sanders a
couple of
days, but then I think the
wagons start to
circle around Hillary Clinton.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, Gwen, I
think that
Bernie Sanders has to get on
board. It's all
well and good...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: How much time does
he have to
do that?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes.
Well, look, running for
president is a grueling
job. And he's been doing it for
months, and
he's exceeded expectations. And
he deserves
some sort of victory lap, even
if he loses.
So I think everybody would give
him a few
days to recover and lick his
wounds.
But the reality is, he doesn't
merely need
to stop the campaign against
Hillary Clinton.
He doesn't merely need to
acknowledge that
she's going to be the nominee.
He needs to
embrace her. He needs to bring
his supporters
along, particularly those
18-to-29-year-olds
who are not enthusiastic about
her.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
party which
already has a putative nominee,
and that's
the Republican Party. Donald
Trump is undergoing
some backlash because of his
comments that
John Yang was talking about,
about the judge
from Indiana who happens to be
of Mexican
descent and whether he's fair
and whether
he thinks a judge who is Muslim
would be fair.
There seems to be real pushback
this time
from Republicans.
AMY WALTER: Well, I mean, I
guess the question
is there really pushback, Gwen,
or is it really
just playing defense?
And I think that's where
Republicans are stuck
here. We have this balancing act
for so many
Republican officeholders, folks
who have come
out and endorsed him, those who
are on the
ticket with him, who say I'm
going to support
him, but I'm going to try to
keep my distance
from him.
But as this week exposed, it is
a very difficult
thing to do. No matter what
Donald Trump says,
especially the more incendiary
things he says,
you as a candidate or an
officeholder on the
Republican side are going to
have to answer
for those things, for as much as
you would
like to distance yourself.
And I think this is what they're
going to
have to deal with day after day
after day
on this campaign. I think it's
quite remarkable
that we're on day -- I don't
know what we
are, day four or five of this
story, and Donald
Trump continues to put -- to
stoke the flames
of this, rather than trying to
pivot himself
under the other issues that we
know he would
have a much easier time going
and focusing
on.
GWEN IFILL: Meantime, if you're
Mitch McConnell,
if you're Paul Ryan, if you're
any other number
of -- or any of the number of
other Republicans
who have already endorsed and
kind of embraced
Donald Trump as the nominee,
you're going
to be asked every time you show
up somewhere,
is he a racist?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Exactly.
And, Gwen, I don't know why
we're surprised
by this. This is Donald Trump's
M.O. This
is the way he's behaved for
months. And there
is no reason that he's going to
change. So,
I expect similar incidents
between now and
the first week in November,
where Donald Trump
says things that are
controversial and explosive.
And you're right, and
microphones are put
in Kelly Ayotte's face and Mitch
McConnell's
and Paul Ryan's each and every
day. He said
this. Do you agree or disagree?
And that's
a problem with a campaign like
this. It's,
the campaign isn't set the
agenda -- well,
actually, Donald Trump is
setting the agenda.
AMY WALTER: I was going to
say...
STUART ROTHENBERG: But that's
not the normal
campaign agenda. He just refuses
to act like
any other politician.
GWEN IFILL: So, that's where I
wanted to go,
actually, Amy.
Is this a campaign, or is it a
reality show
with Donald Trump in the
driver's seat and
everybody else, including
surrogates, including
endorses, including anybody else
who might
-- may be a future vice
presidential running
mate, they all have to kind of
go to sleep
every night not knowing what
they're going
to wake up to?
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
I mean, what you saw in the
Republican primary
was a candidate who upended the
traditional
norms of campaigning. And I
think a lot of
folks assumed that that was the
way that he
could win a general election as
well, except
for the fact that people forgot
a couple of
things.
One, a Republican primary
electorate is not
a general electorate. This is
especially important
when you realize how much more
diverse a general
electorate is than the
Republican primary,
which is overwhelmingly, like
90-plus percent,
white.
The second thing is that Donald
Trump is now
under a greater amount of
scrutiny and press
coverage even than he was in the
primary.
And, as we see, he doesn't do
very well when
he is forced to answer for his
positions,
when he's put on the defensive.
He lashes
back.
And so for all the folks who
said, isn't this
so fun, he's changing the rules
of the game,
the reality is, the rules are
there for a
reason. And he can try to change
the rules
of the game, but it's going to
cost him with
the folks who didn't vote in the
Republican
primary.
GWEN IFILL: Which party is in a
tougher spot
right now, the Democrats trying
to figure
out what to do with Bernie
Sanders or the
Republicans trying to figure out
what to do
with their own nominee?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, I
suppose today the
Democrats have the immediate
problem. They
have two candidates running for
their party's
presidential nomination.
But, in the long run, I think
it's very clear
the Republicans have the bigger
problem, because
they have a deeply flawed
nominee, or de facto
nominee. They have a divided
party. The Democrats
are divided now, but they will
get together.
Sure, Hillary Clinton has some
work to do
among younger voters and the
most progressives,
but, no, I think the Democrats
are more likely
to coalesce, have a tighter bond
than the
Republicans.
I think that division is going
to continue
all the way to November.
GWEN IFILL: Stu Rothenberg of
The Rothenberg
& Gonzales Political Report, Amy
Cook of The
Cook Political Report -- Amy
Walter, that
is -- whatever your name is --
thank you both
very much.
AMY WALTER: Whatever.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
long-lasting
influence of Muhammad Ali;
revitalizing the
historic Route 66; plus,
remembering the NPR
journalist who died in a Taliban
ambush.
But, first, back to politics.
This year's presidential
election will likely
feature, as we just heard, two
major-party
nominees who currently have some
of the highest
unfavorability ratings of any
such candidates
in recent decades.
As a result, some voters may
take a look at
the nominee chosen last week by
the Libertarian
Party, the former Governor of
New Mexico Gary
Johnson.
I spoke with him a short time
ago.
Governor Gary Johnson, welcome.
GARY JOHNSON, Libertarian
Presidential Candidate:
Judy, such an honor to be here.
Watching you
on television forever, and here
I am.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we thank
you for being
here.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to talk to
you about
Libertarian.
GARY JOHNSON: Yes. Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What you believe,
smaller government.
You said you believe in a 20
percent cut across
the board in government
spending.
GARY JOHNSON: That would be a
target, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The target. And
you would phase
out Social Security.
What else would you eliminate?
GARY JOHNSON: You know, no, I
wouldn't phase
out Social Security. I think
that Social Security
is absolutely fixable.
There are some reforms, though,
to Social
Security, raising the retirement
age. You
could have a very fair
means-testing. You
could also be able to
self-direct funds. By
being able to do that, people,
lower-income,
middle-income, they could
actually pass on
the asset of Social Security to
their heirs
by doing that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you also
would clearly
leave some government functions.
You would
have a -- you would defend the
country.
GARY JOHNSON: Well, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have
talked about law
enforcement. You have talked
about some other
safety functions of government.
So let's -- let me try to get
specific.
GARY JOHNSON: Sure. Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Air traffic
control.
GARY JOHNSON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Seat belts. Would
you require
seat belts? Would people be
banned from texting
while driving? I mean, what
kinds of things...
GARY JOHNSON: Well, as president
of the United
States, that's what I would get
elected, I
would just like people to
believe that I am
going to sign on to any
legislation that's
going to make things better and
that I'm going
to veto any legislation that at
the end of
the day would just add time and
money to our
lives and wouldn't really
accomplish anything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when you say
less government
is better, today, government
requires things
like seat belts, like...
GARY JOHNSON: And, of course,
that's all local.
That's all state initiative.
And, you know,
I buckle up, myself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Food. What about
food safety
requirements? Those come from
the Food and
Drug Administration.
GARY JOHNSON: Well, so, food
safety -- 20
percent reduction in federal
spending, I don't
think, is the end of the world.
I think that
that is very accomplishable, and
that's a
target, Judy.
So count on me when it comes to
legislation
from Congress to actually make
government
more efficient, but not
neglecting the fundamental
role of safety. Government
exists to protect
us against individuals, groups,
corporations,
foreign governments that would
do us harm.
In the context of food safety...
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have also
talked about
eliminating the federal income
tax, so how
would you pay for the services
that you kept?
GARY JOHNSON: Well, in the case
of what I'm
advocating is -- and, by the
way, I'm going
to sign on to anything that
reduces taxes,
simplifies taxes. So, flat tax,
hey, count
on my support.
But, ideally, we would eliminate
income tax,
we would eliminate corporate
tax. Because
we would do that, we could
abolish the IRS,
and replace it all with one
federal consumption
tax.
Now, I suggest that people look
at the FairTax
as a template for how to dot the
I's and cross
the T's on accomplishing one
federal consumption
tax. If we abolish corporate tax
in this country,
I believe tens of millions of
jobs would get
created. Imagine life without
having to comply
with the IRS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn you
now to foreign
policy.
There's so much to ask you
about. But you
are noninterventionist, but you
are not isolationist.
I guess the question is, if the
U.S. -- if,
say, Vladimir Putin were to go
into a country
in Eastern Europe, should the
U.S. join NATO
and stand up for at the country
that the Russians
went into?
GARY JOHNSON: Well, first of
all, we have
many treaties, many treaties
with foreign
countries where we are obligated
to defend
their borders. And these were
treaties...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you would
honor those?
GARY JOHNSON: Well, these are
treaties that
were not ratified by Congress.
These have been presidential
treaties, military
treaties. We need to involve
Congress in all
of these decisions, which they
have abdicated
really to the executive, to the
military.
Right now, Russia is stretched
economically.
Do we really want to go in and
defend Baltic
states against Russian
aggression?
Do we really want to go to war
over that?
I think it's wrong to project
what you would
or wouldn't do given any
situation, because
that's kind of drawing a line in
the sand.
And that's one of the problems
with President
Obama has had, is he draws lines
in the sand
that get crossed and then no
action.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Johnson,
when you
have been asked whether you
would take more
votes away as a Libertarian
Party nominee
from Donald Trump or Hillary
Clinton, you
have said you believe it would
be equal.
GARY JOHNSON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have been
more critical
with Donald Trump.
You concurred when your vice
presidential
running mate, Bill Weld,
compared what Trump
has said about Mexicans and
Muslims. He's
compared it to Hitler and Nazi
Germany. Is
there anything that Hillary
Clinton has done
that you would put in that
category?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not in that
category.
But, at the end of the day, I
believe that
Hillary Clinton is going to grow
government,
that government is all about
giving out things.
Bill Clinton was in New Mexico
talking about
free electricity to the Native
Americans.
Well, nothing is free. Somebody
pays for that.
So, I believe Hillary is going
to grow government.
And I don't believe...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You think that's
as bad as
the kinds of things Donald
Trump...
GARY JOHNSON: Well, it's going
to raise taxes.
And I think Hillary has also
been the architect,
one of the premier, primary
architects of
our foreign policy that has made
the world
less safe, not more safe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you think
that's as bad
as what you have heard from Mr.
Trump during...
GARY JOHNSON: Well, I really
take exception
with what Donald Trump says with
regard to
immigration, with regard to
killing the families
of Muslim terrorists.
He's going to bring back
water-boarding or
worse. He's for free trade, but
he's going
to implement tariffs, on and on
and on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Gary
Johnson, we're
going to leave it there, the
presidential
nominee of the Libertarian
Party.
Thank you very much.
GARY JOHNSON: Judy, so nice to
be with you.
I'm the only third-party
candidate that's
going to be on the ballot in all
50 states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks for
pointing that out.
GWEN IFILL: This will be a week
of remembrance
of the great heavyweight champ
and humanitarian
Muhammad Ali.
His hometown of Louisville,
Kentucky, is preparing
for a funeral and a public
memorial service
to be held Friday, as
generations across the
country assess the enormous
scope and reach
of Ali's life, a sports icon,
but also a social
activist and powerful political
voice during
turbulent times.
Tonight, we focus on one of
Ali's boldest
decisions.
William Brangham has our
conversation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That moment
was the pivotal
time in the late 1960s when Ali
was still
the heavyweight champion of the
world, when
he resisted the draft to
Vietnam, a court
fight he ultimately won after
more than three
years. But he was stripped of
his heavyweight
title.
Here's Ali in 1968, talking
about his Muslim
faith, and the loss of his
boxing title.
MUHAMMAD ALI, Boxing Heavyweight
Champion:
Boxing was only for self-gain,
just beating
up one of my brothers or
somebody else's brother
for money.
If I would only deny my faith,
if I would
only join up against my
religion, I could
easily go back to making
millions. So, I could
always say that I turned this
down. I didn't
lose it. I turned it down. And I
go out still
with my head high.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For some
perspective on
that time in Ali's life, and our
evolving
perceptions of the man, we're
joined by Gerald
Early, who edited "The Muhammad
Ali Reader."
He's a professor of English and
African-American
studies at Washington
University.
So, Gerald Early, I wonder if
you could just
remind our viewers that this was
a time -- Ali
was at the peak of his powers.
He was the
heavyweight champion when he
took the stance
that cost him a great deal.
GERALD EARLY, Washington
University: Yes,
he was at the peak of his powers
as an athlete,
as a fighter, but he was also
sort of at this
time at the peak of his
consciousness as a
black man.
This stance that he takes
coincides with the
rise of the black power
movement. And Ali
has now become, really, in his
own way, an
icon of that movement. So here
was a man who
was standing up against the
government and
here was a man who was saying
that he was
willing to sacrifice his career
and everything
to stand up for what he believed
in.
So, this was a great moment for
inspiration
for a particular generation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You have
written, though,
that some of us have
misinterpreted Ali's
stance against the war. I wonder
how so.
GERALD EARLY: Well, I think
people misinterpreted
the stance against the war
because they saw
Ali, basically, as if his stance
was coming
from the left.
Ali was really not a leftist,
nor was he ever
a civil rights activist. All was
-- all of
this was generated by his faith,
and particularly
his love of Elijah Muhammad.
Elijah Muhammad
had gone to jail for not
conforming to the
draft laws back during World War
II. He felt
that he could do no less than
what his leader
was doing in standing up against
the draft.
And so all of this was coming
out of a religions
consciousness, not purely out of
a political
consciousness, which I think
sometimes people
misunderstand.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You said there
that you
don't think that he was also a
civil rights
activist, but certainly that has
been much
of the commentary in the last
few days, lionizing
his civil rights stance.
GERALD EARLY: Well, that's
unfortunate, because
those people are wrong.
He belonged to the Nation of
Islam. The Nation
of Islam wasn't a civil rights
organization.
In fact, the Nation of Islam
disliked the
civil rights movement, disliked
racial integration,
because they were a separatist
movement.
And Ali, really, if you go back
and you read
interviews with Ali during this
time and so
forth, he criticizes the civil
rights movement
and he criticizes integration.
He just so
happens that, at this point in
history, he
collides with this black
activism that is
going on at the time, but he is
not really
part of it.
Being in the Nation of Islam,
he's really
quite separate from it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, during
those three years
when Ali has been kicked out of
boxing, what
was he doing during that time?
GERALD EARLY: For most of the
time, when Ali
was not in boxing, during the
three-and-a-half
years of his exile, he was
touring on campuses,
giving lectures.
He was very popular on college
campuses giving
lectures, mostly about his
beliefs and his
stance against the war. It
turned out to be
in many ways a very good and
broadening experience
for him, because he got to meet
an entire
cohort of his generation that he
had not been
exposed to, because, one, he
hadn't gone to
college. He barely had gotten
out of high
school.
And, two, he was a professional
athlete and
had really not been exposed to a
great deal
outside of his training to be a
fighter. And
it really was part of what you
might call
the education of Muhammad Ali,
or the continuing
education of Muhammad Ali in
this way.
And I think it greatly affected
him in a positive
way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This Friday,
obviously,
we're going to see a very big
memorial to
the man. All the luminaries will
come out
and speak.
I wonder what you think would be
the best
tribute for us to hear this
coming Friday
about Ali.
GERALD EARLY: I know there are
going to be
a lot of dignitaries and
celebrity people
who will speak about him.
But I think the best tribute
would actually
come from the everyday people
who were part
of his following back when he
was at the height
of his popularity as an athlete
and as a figure
in the United States, those
people who were
inspired by him, who felt that,
when they
saw what he was doing and was
willing to sacrifice
because of what he believed in,
were inspired
by him to believe a little bit
more in what
they were about, who felt that
I, too, could
do something for myself because
I see what
he's doing, it would actually be
a tremendous
tribute to hear the voices of
those people,
because, in many ways, Muhammad
Ali wasn't
just a great athlete or even a
great dissident.
In the end, he turned out, in
many ways, in
how he inspired people to be a
great humanitarian.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Gerald Early,
thank you very much.
GERALD EARLY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now another in
our series of
stories about Culture at Risk,
and, in this
case, what's been lost along one
of the more
storied highways across the
country.
Jeffrey Brown took a recent road
trip along
U.S. Route 66.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was neither
the country's
oldest nor longest road. For
Hollywood and
everyone else, Route 66 came to
symbolize
America, a people on the move, a
lifestyle
that characterized it.
Some 2,400 miles of asphalt
winding through
eight states from Illinois,
south through
the heartland, then through the
Southwest
to California, it's a journey
that millions
once took, before the nation's
economy and
culture underwent vast changes.
It begins here in downtown
Chicago, an older
American story about the open
road and connecting
small rural communities to big
cities, and
a newer story about preserving
some of that
cultural past for economic gain
today.
Route 66 got its official
designation as a
national highway in 1926. For
John Steinbeck
in "The Grapes of Wrath," it was
the mother
road, a major artery for
migration during
the Dust Bowl of the 1930s, and
later for
travel and tourism. But by the
'70s, the federal
interstate highway system had
begun to take
over, bypassing towns, and
devastating communities
along the original route, in
favor of speed.
BOB RUSSELL, Mayor of Pontiac,
Illinois: That
was it. The stores started
closing one by
one. The gas stations went out
of business.
The restaurants went out of
business. And,
boy, your town starts to look
really bad in
a hurry.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, says Mayor
Bob Russell,
Pontiac, Illinois, an
agricultural community
of 12,000 two hours southwest of
Chicago,
looks pretty good.
And it's a prime example of a
rebirth of Route
66 that's occurring in various
parts of the
country. Town leaders here
decided to use
the history of the famous road
to their advantage,
20 large murals, a museum of
Route 66 collectibles,
and much more, all bringing in
tourists from
around the world.
They have renovated historic
buildings and
encouraged new mom-and-pop
stores to come
in.
BOB RUSSELL: This building in a
couple of
months will be ready for sale or
lease, and
we will have another business
move in here.
Then that generates tax revenue
and it keeps
us from raising our real estate
taxes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And when a
collector of vintage
Pontiac cars was looking for a
place to build
a museum, Pontiac, Illinois, not
Michigan,
provided just the right
incentives.
BOB RUSSELL: And if you watch
the old 66 movies,
there's always a girl involved
and there's
always a fast car, the Corvette
or Mustang.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's a car.
There's a -- that's
part of the culture and part of
the whole
history.
BOB RUSSELL: That is the
culture.
And a lot of people from the
other countries
coming here, they want to
experience that
freedom that they saw in that
movie.
JEFFREY BROWN: But Pontiac is
still an exception.
In Berwyn, Illinois, a suburb of
Chicago,
some 26 stylish auto showrooms
once lined
Route 66. Most have been
bulldozed to make
way for fast-food franchises.
JON FEY, Berwyn Preservation
Committee: This
was a Chevy dealer when it was
built in the
'30s.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not everyone
might agree that
'50s era showrooms are worth
saving. But businessman
Jon Fey of the Berwyn
Preservation Committee
does.
JON FEY: This is the kind of
business that
is just perfect for...
JEFFREY BROWN: This is what you
want?
JON FEY: This would -- yes, this
is a great
example of using the building in
a way that
enhances what they are doing and
helps the
community.
JEFFREY BROWN: But Fey says
Berwyn hasn't
provided enough incentives for
businesses
to preserve much of downtown.
JON FEY: I'm realistic enough to
understand
we can't bring it all back. It's
not going
to be 1926 again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
JON FEY: But if there's enough
gems that we
can recognize and preserve, I
think we will
have a real valuable commodity
for the community.
JEFFREY BROWN: But it's tough
going?
JON FEY: It's very tough going.
JEFFREY BROWN: Far across the
country, Glen
Duncan tells a similar story
about the struggles
to preserve landmarks along what
for many
is the most famous part of old
Route 66.
GLEN DUNCAN, Author, "Route 66
in California":
This is a former hotel.
JEFFREY BROWN: He took me to the
town of Barstow,
California two hours east of Los
Angeles,
where motels and restaurants of
another era
still line the route. Many have
shut down,
but some are thriving.
GLEN DUNCAN: This is the Casa
del Desierto,
which is a Fred Harvey house.
JEFFREY BROWN: The town has
refurbished this
former hotel and train station,
which now
houses two museums, a ballroom
and conference
space.
GLEN DUNCAN: In the summer, they
say that
50 percent of the travelers on
Route 66 are
from Europe or Asia.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
GLEN DUNCAN: And...
JEFFREY BROWN: Because they're
fascinated
with some idea of Americana?
GLEN DUNCAN: Well, Route 66 is
somewhat -- one
of the things that they know
about America.
I think it's because it sort of
represents
America back when everybody
loved us.
JEFFREY BROWN: But 15 minutes
from Barstow
is the crumbling town of
Daggett.
GLEN DUNCAN: Daggett was where
they had an
inspection station back in the
Depression.
If you didn't have more than $20
in your pockets
and didn't have evidence that
you had a job
in California, they turned you
back.
JEFFREY BROWN: Those inspection
stations were
designed to keep unemployed
workers from pouring
into California. And Duncan says
it's important
to preserve the entire history
of Route 66,
even the less savory parts.
That's also the mission of
self-described
cultural documentarian Candacy
Taylor, who's
photographing properties along
Route 66 once
listed in what was known as the
Green Book.
CANDACY TAYLOR, Cultural
Documentarian: There
would be opportunities for some
businesses
to actually have their photos.
JEFFREY BROWN: A travel guide of
hotels, restaurants
and other businesses that served
African-Americans
in an era when many
establishments wouldn't.
CANDACY TAYLOR: This was a time
when it was
dangerous to travel for black
people. So if
you got stranded or you got a
flat tire in
the wrong place at the wrong
time, there was
-- your life could be
threatened.
JEFFREY BROWN: More than
three-quarters of
the Green Book buildings on 66
have been torn
down. Others are at risk of
demolition or
decay, as here on L.A.'s Skid
Row, where the
Regal and Norbo hotels were once
fashionable
gathering spots.
CANDACY TAYLOR: Now it's Skid
Row. But back
in the day, this was a vibrant
community.
So, it was a place to eat, see
some entertainment
and spend the night.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just five minutes
away, one
of the more famous listings in
the Green Book
has been renovated. Clifton's
Cafeteria, with
its murals, redwood trees and
wild animal
displays, was renowned for
serving whites
and blacks, and those who were
too poor to
pay.
CANDACY TAYLOR: This is really a
piece of
American history, of living
history. These
sites are physical evidence of
racial segregation
and integration. So there were a
lot of people
on the sidelines really trying
to make some
kind of change happen. So I
think this is
a part of history that hasn't
been documented.
JEFFREY BROWN: A history once
vibrant, then
lost, and now, perhaps, making a
comeback.
From downtown Chicago, and 2,400
miles away
here in California's Mojave
Desert, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Some stories can
only be told
because of journalists who are
willing to
risk it all, telling the
dangerous stories
in word and picture.
David Gilkey and Zabihullah
Tamanna were two
such storytellers. They died on
Sunday in
a Taliban ambush near Marja in
Southern Afghanistan.
Gilkey was an award-winning
photographer for
National Public Radio, Tamanna,
a respected
local journalist and translator.
Here's Gilkey in May, before he
left for Afghanistan,
describing how he used his
camera lens to
capture the story.
DAVID GILKEY, National Public
Radio: One of
the amazing things about being
embedded and
working with U.S. forces is just
how intimate
you are with the subjects.
And this is a picture from a
farm, again in
the south, 2010, of the soldiers
talking with
someone they suspected of
planting IEDs.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the life
and work
of David Gilkey, I'm joined by
NPR's David
Greene, co-host of "Morning
Edition."
First of all, our condolences to
you and your
staff.
DAVID GREENE, National Public
Radio: Thank
you, Gwen. We appreciate that.
It's been a
hard -- it's been a hard day.
GWEN IFILL: It's been a hard
day.
DAVID GREENE: And I speak for
all of us when
I say, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: I read today that --
someone say
that collateral damage has a
face. This is
the case of that, isn't it?
DAVID GREENE: Yes.
I mean, David Gilkey said that.
And it's so
sad that he's fallen victim to
that. I knew
David very well. And I think
that he always
knew the risks in going into
conflict zones
and places like this, and
believed it was
worth it to tell the story.
I mean, he wanted to capture
humanity in stories
like this. I think it just -- we
all knew
that this was possible, but to
lose a friend
and a colleague, you just don't
really think
it will ever happen.
GWEN IFILL: Most people think of
NPR as an
audio experience...
DAVID GREENE: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: ... not as a visual
experience,
but David Gilkey was one of
those who expanded
that idea.
DAVID GREENE: He really -- you
know, and a
lot of people jokingly asked
about that. When
David started almost a decade
ago, they would
say, what are you doing taking
pictures for
a radio company?
And when I started working with
him, I just
so quickly realized that the
kind of journalism
he does, even though it's images
and not sound,
it's exactly what we do. It's
all the sensibilities
that I think we believe in. It's
giving people
time and space to just sort of
collect their
thoughts and think out loud.
It's being respectful. It's
waiting for someone's
story to kind of emerge. And
that's what we
do on the radio. And that's what
David did.
Just to watch him operate, I
mean, it was
such a joy and inspiring,
because he would
just be respectful.
He would be curious, and he
would interact
with someone, and sort of just
wait for that
story to come through and
capture it.
GWEN IFILL: You traveled with
him a great
deal.
DAVID GREENE: Yes, which was a
real honor.
We went to Russia together. We
went to Cuba
together. We crossed the U.S.
together on
a crazy political trip in 2008.
And -- but,
you know, I'm one of many who
had the honor
of traveling with him, because
he would travel
a lot. He loved being on the
road and was
just a collaborator like no
other.
GWEN IFILL: Was he a war
photographer by gene
or was he just a people
storyteller?
DAVID GREENE: You know, it's
funny.
He -- if you met him, you would
think he was
a war photographer. You would
almost think
he was at war himself, because
he sort of
had that tough guy persona. It
was, like,
you would want to be in a
foxhole with this
guy.
But when you get to know him,
you quickly
realize he's -- and he's just
like a soft,
gentle soul who was so kind.
And, you know,
he was gruff sometimes. We would
be cranky
together, but he would also --
he knew what
was going on not just in my
life, not just
in my wife's life, but my wife's
brothers'
lives.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID GREENE: And he would keep
track of that.
And I think that -- that level
of interest
and that level of sort of
curiosity and caring,
that's what came through in his
journalism
and in his photography.
GWEN IFILL: Tell us about
Zabihullah Tamanna,
because a lot of people don't
understand that
in order for someone like David
Gilkey or
for you to do your job in a
place like Afghanistan,
a translator or a right-hand
person was necessary.
DAVID GREENE: Yes.
Yes, I mean, I think of Zabi as
part of this
extended family at NPR. Wherever
we are abroad,
you talk to anyone who has
reported abroad,
any foreign correspondents -- I
was in Russia
and worked with local
translators and local
journalists. They are part of
the family.
They are risking their lives for
us, to do
journalism with us.
They care about the organization
as much as
people like us to who are part
of it. And,
you know, he left behind three
kids and a
wife and was one of the most
respected journalists
in Afghanistan. And it's -- it's
-- it's devastating.
GWEN IFILL: It is devastating.
David Greene, thank you so much
for taking
some time to tell us about them
both.
DAVID GREENE: Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be back
in a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Tiny plastic particles
litter our oceans.
What does that mean for the
health of marine
wildlife? Researchers in Sweden
found that
What does that mean for the
health of marine
wildlife? Researchers in Sweden
found that
exposure to micro-plastic seemed
to change
the habits and instincts of baby
fish, making
exposure to micro-plastic seemed
to change
the habits and instincts of baby
fish, making
them more vulnerable to
predators.
You can find out more about that
phenomenon
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
more remembrances of Muhammad
Ali. That is
on most PBS stations.
And that is the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will focus on the
end of the
presidential primary race, as
voters go to
On Tuesday, we will focus on the
end of the
presidential primary race, as
voters go to
the polls in five states.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.